It was the year 1902. A company founded in
that year! It has got more than 60,000 products.
Individual products. From the very small to
the very large. From the daily commonplace
to those special components used in space
crafts… It has got one more credit! It is
probably the most “patented” company.
It has got… Recently it crossed that record…
100,000 patents! Their employees now hold,
for their products, for their processes, for
their technologies, 100,000 patents! Who is
this company? What can we learn from them?
Namaste! There is a little clue, hidden right
in the title. Did you get it? The name of
that company.. M. M. M. Minnesota Mining and
Manufacturing..! Hey! It’s our familiar
friend, 3M! What a famous company that is!?
We are going to talk about just this company
now!
It started with a small rock — that is how
they recount the history of this company!
There was this mountainous region that this
company’s founders purchase. Hoping to mine
much from that, wanting to mine corundum,
a very hard substance, as hard as a diamond,
capable of even cutting through diamonds,
… that is how they start it. But, disaster
strikes very early! True credit to them that
they didn’t let this very early setback
to affect their business. It wasn’t corundum.
It was actually a mineral much lower in quality,
called anarthosite. They get only this mineral…
But, without losing hope, how do they fight
back… How did they reinvent themselves…
How, even after a hundred and twenty years,
3M stands as a symbol for innovation and quality…?
What is the story behind it? A company that
started like this, 3M, when Neil Armstrong,
the first human to set foot on moon, when
he places his first famous footstep on the
moon, “A small step for man, a giant leap
for mankind”, the sole of the shoe he used,
the special rubber used for it, was manufactured
by 3M! How did they make this jump?
Scotch is a special brand name owned by 3M.
(Not Scotch Whiskey). But, Scotch Tape. Used
for masking on automobiles. Masking is a very
important task. Because, when you want to
paint two colours on an automobile, one paint
shouldn’t bleed on to the other, and so
they mask it. The masking tape should not
leave any residue, should stick well, … These
salespersons had gone to sell the tape, and
the car mechanics had ripped off the tape
disgustedly in front of the salespeople, and
told them, “Go give it to your Scottish
bosses, ask them to make it better, and come
back!” (Because, in those days, the word
“Scottish” was used derogatorily, to represent
people who were stingy, who weren’t bothered
about quality, etc… How did THAT brand name,
that rejected brand name, become so famous
as one of the best tapes in the world?
How did THAT company manage to somehow get
on to the hands of Steve Jobs? Every iPhone
and every iPad that was launched in the first
six seven years of the Apple saga, that thin
film on the top of the glass, those touch-sensitive
gestures, from swipe to tap, from touch to
drag, how did they happen? Because of film
from 3M! How did the “Scotch” brand…
how was it able to make this leap on to Steve
Jobs’ hand? It has to be magic!
And, that magic is captured in this book.
It is called A Century of Innovation. I am
not sure who actually wrote this book. So
many people have contributed to it. It is
a company book. A book by the folks from the
company for the folks in the company! But,
it is such a beautiful study! Such a historic
account of all kinds of ingredients that go
into innovation, invention, collaboration,
and sustenance. If something has to go on
and on and on for ever, what are needed? These
are needed! Little bits, here and there, we
have already seen in some other Quotidians,
but if one company, so far ahead of its time,
many many decades ago, if they have managed
it, surely they are worth being praised, and
surely they are worth being emulated. We need
to copy a lot from here! Pay attention!
The first thing that struck me in this book,
there is this phrase called “Patient Money”!
Is there an amazing idea? A stellar product?
A spellbinding technology? Is there too much
friction and resistance internally towards
that? But… Do YOU feel that this is something
worth pursuing, something worth encouraging?
Go ahead! Do it! The company will take care!
The company will protect you! Because, they
seem to know that the Patient Money… some
things yield fruit only when you let it take
its own time.. Months, years, let it soak
in and eventually bloom. You cannot speed
up innovation. Beyond a point, speeding it
up will kill it! This seems to have been deeply
embedded into their psyche, according to this
book. So many products, from their taping
products to their new adhesives, they have
always encouraged people to just “Keep at
it” and have a “Go at it”. If you are
confident, you should not bother that there
is resistance around you. Patient Money!
The second concept that seemed to appeal to
me is this thing about managing people. We
have already seen a variety of different approaches
in a variety of different companies. Nothing
new, under the sun. But, so many years ago,
when management wasn’t even a discipline,
when I realise that this company has already
innovated in the right people processes, it
fills me with wonderment! William McKnight
was among the first CEOs. He, way back, a
hundred and ten years ago, he talks about
delegating responsibility. If you have reached
a position, start thinking about how can you
give away all the other roles. Because, people
under you need to be told that they are trusted.
That they are tolerated. That they are actually
being given the freedom to innovate in the
way they want to. We have already seen the
famous triplet of words — “How”, “Why”,
“What”. In that context, “How you get
something done is up to you, I am not going
to micromanage you” is the trust you need
to give the people under you… They are not
going to be happy being told how to get something
done. They want to be told what is needed.
Sometimes, they don’t even want to be told
that! They just want to be shown the why.
They will take care of the how!
The third interesting aspect that kind of
popped out to me was how they fostered innovation.
They have this lab. Research lab. Some of
the scientists in that research lab will go
fishing on a Thursday afternoon. Doesn’t
matter. Because, over the long run, they would
work on a Sunday night and anyway, make up
for it. Also, innovation cannot be measured
in clock hours. We know that very well! And,
when somebody has a product idea, when somebody
is passionate, when somebody is passionately
creative, just leave them be. We don’t know
when the next Post-It! notes is going to come
along! (We will be revisiting these Post-It!
notes in a while…!) It was such a path-breaking
innovation for 3M! A failed innovation! When
everybody was relegating it to the trash bin,
thinking what earthly use can come of it,
other opportunities were discovered, dug up,
and the invention was revived! So, who knows
what else is going to pop up when you least
expect it! Beware, is the message this book
gives us.
We have talked about 20% time at Google. Where
they famously allow you to experiment, to
pursue your own passion, to do a side-project.
But, you know where that came from? That came
from 15% time at 3M. 15% time at 3M came right
after the Second World War. 1948! Imagine,
in 1948, they are saying, 15% of your time,
chase your own dream, just go ahead! Cellophane
tape was born like that. Cannibalisation of
ideas! If something is happening the company,
and competitors are threatening to eat it
up, 3M would say, don’t allow the competition
to eat it up, come up with our own product
that cannibalises this one. It is not just
for saving face! Our own product will get
new business from the death of our own product!
Isn’t that amazing?! There is a heat-resistant
paint. It has been invented already. But,
there seems to be no market around for it.
Why? Because, all these years, instead of
a heat-resistant paint, they have been using
a heat-resistant cover to protect the car
till now. Who brought this cover to market?
3M! Cannibalisation! Heat-resistant paint
from 3M cannibalised heat-resistant cover
from 3M! There will be disagreement. If you
are a technologist, if you are a scientist,
it is okay if management disagrees with you!
Go ahead. Do it on your 15% time. Come next
month. Do a demo. Win your case. And share
your dream! That was the message in the book.
Meet this man. Richard Drew. He was a senior
scientist. A scientist among scientists. A
scientist who was herding a lot many other
scientists. One of his greatest inventions,
of course, was cellophane. Scotch tape. The
scientist who invented cellophane. While putting
his team together, he made it very clear.
Hire for creativity. Hire creative people.
Hey, don’t get me Ph.Ds. Hire creative people.
Yeah, we can always hire a Ph.D for the nitty-gritty
details. Did you listen to that?! Because,
he felt, education, higher education, the
more educated somebody became, the more rigid
they ended up being in their thought process,
and we need out of the box thinkers. So, hire
for creativity, we can get Ph.Ds for the nitty-gritties
anyway, later..!
When talking about innovation, 3M had this
very clear message, very important message,
transferred to every member in the company.
Innovation and Invention — there is a big
difference. Invention is finding something
out. But, it becomes an innovation only when
it touches the lives of customers in a positive
way. It should change their hearts. It should
introduce progress in their lives. It should
empower them to do things that they couldn’t
do till now. That is when it can be counted
as an innovation. This, for example, is the
first artificial track. A running track. 3M
made the first synthetic track for the Olympics.
They called it Tartan Track. Made of urethane.
They used a rubber component to create this
track. Nozari was the person who invented
this. Nozari goes to his boss, George Allen,
and says, “I have done this. I have finished.
What do I do next?!” To which George is
supposed to have chased him off with a response
like this: “Finished? No! No way! Not at
all! Go to every division in the company!
Go to every department! Show them what you
have got! And find out where else this will
be useful! Where else, this new compound that
you have invented in the lab, can be useful!”.
Perhaps that is why, the same chemical compound
found in the Tartan Track is being used as
a surgical brush. The sponge used in this
surgical brush is made of the same material
that makes the Tartan Track! So, same chemical
— completely different environment, completely
different use, only because, invention is
easy, innovation is a longterm process, and
requires interaction, collaboration with people.
When employees look at 3M, they see it as
a very big sandbox. A playground. Almost every
scientist in the book says, “It is an experimental
laboratory for us. Even if you pay the same
salary, you can’t give the freedom, the
spirit of innovation that I see here”. “Sixty
percent of the experiments that we try in
this research laboratory fail! They don’t
hit mainstream! Sixty percent of them fail!
And the key benefit here, in this laboratory,
is we don’t attach failure to the individual.
We don’t punish the people who actually
failed in that experiment. We almost wear
it with pride and honour, like wounds of battle!
See how many failures I have survived!”
Phone calls used to arrive to this research
lab. The book talks about a specific call.
“From the Wisconsin plant of 3M, we received
a phone call. And, we were told to visit this
plant and spend three days. We were told that
nobody will tell us what to look for. We can
meet with the employees, they will be ready
to answer any of our questions. Look around.
Find out what’s to be done. After three
days, their employees will be waiting to listen
to us and follow our guideline. We were supposed
to tell them what has to be changed for them
to become more productive and more innovative.”
They were like a flying squad within the company.
They were like a research lab who would get
phone calls with a blank cheque. Just go and
find out what can be improved! Imagine!
The book also talks about important types
of people that any person or any project needs
for it to really succeed. First, you need
a Mentor. A Mentor is typically really charged
up about a technology or process, and seeing
you involved in it, says, “Come, Let me
teach it to you. I will be your Guru”. A
Sponsor is actually in love with that amazing
product you are trying to build. Because,
if you bring out something amazing, that is
good for the Sponsor too. So, I will do my
best to help you! I will sponsor this because
the results will help me also! The Champion?
Well, this person is in love… with YOU!
“You are so amazing, if you succeed, I will
be happy, I am ready to be the person who
will push you forward. Whatever you do, I
am in love with you, I am so thrilled about
the potential that you have, let us make YOU
happen!” says the Champion. So, the Mentor
is in love with the technology, a Sponsor
is in love with the final product you are
building, a Champion is in love with you.
These three kinds of people… some count
themselves lucky if they get one such..! And
3M is famous for building an environment that
makes all three possible!
Were there any negatives? Across that book..
The 110 years of that book… for many many
years, I saw only photographs of men. No women.
And, photographs of only white men. Why? Couldn’t
they get any other kinds of people for innovation
and leadership roles? A dull prick in my conscience
once in a while… as I flipped through that
book.
Similarly, the book talked much about patents.
Patents are good, yes. A hundred thousand
patents — amazing. But, it looked to me
that they took it too far. Guess how far they
took it?? They have patented this colour!
Canary Yellow! The colour! How can somebody
patent a colour?? Come on! Seemingly, when
people see this, they are immediately reminded
of Post-It! notes, and Post-It! meant 3M,
and so… but how fair is it to patent a colour
itself?!
Also, it didn’t always work! All the great
innovations, all the amazing processes they
had, didn’t help them escape this attack
by Xerox. 3M was manufacturing thermally coated
paper. They were in love, they were enamoured
by it, that they didn’t notice Xerox creeping
in with “I don’t need any special paper.
Any paper in! I will print it as a copy on
any paper! Because I have magic in the lenses
and the laser internally!” 3M never understood.
They fought a losing battle for many many
decades against Xerox, and finally lost. So,
they have lost too… And, credit to them
— they talk about that too, in the book!
As a closing thought, one interesting line
that the original CEO talks about, McKnight
talks about, remained in my mind. He used
to take samples to factories, in his horse-carriage.
But, he would not just go to the front-office,
talk to the bosses, share samples, and go
home. He, (and he would encourage his colleagues
to too!), to go behind the smokestacks! Find
out what’s happening there. Where the real
work is happening. Where the real workers
are. That is where you would get the real
feedback. So, I think that is a very important
lesson that is relevant even today. If you
are a product creator, go behind the smokestacks.
Ask people who will really be using it, and
ask for feedback from them. Alright! We will
meet on May 30th! Thank you!